So we'll just have a few moments of silent meditation. Everyone arrive and then we'll begin.
(Bell)
We'll do the breath purification.
Thank you.
We'll begin or continue with our beginning.
We'll be using these two main practice texts, I think everyone knows,
but our daily prayers, the treasury of precious mantras and prayers,
and then also the Ngondro sadhana.
So to begin, we'll begin by feeling the presence,
invoking the presence of Guru Padmasambhava,
reciting the 7-line prayer and our lineage prayers.
So maybe we'll start in this daily prayers book, page 14, if you need.
Om Bhojinyu jinnu chan sam pedma gesadum bhola
yatsen chuginu dukne pedma jhuni shesudrak
kodukanro maingpe kor chichi jesudak chu ji
jinde dop jeshe ksu sol guru pedma siddhi hum
Om Bhojinyu jinnu chan sam pedma gesadum bhola
yatsen chuginu dukne pedma jhuni shesudrak kodukanro maingpe kor
chichi jenu dukne pedma siddhi hum
Om Bhojinyu jinnu chan sam pedma gesadum bhola
yatsen chuginu dukne pedma jhuni shesudrak kodukanro maingpe kor
chichi jesudak chu ji jinde dop jeshe ksu sol guru pedma siddhi hum
Please give your supreme blessing to this place.
Please give me the four initiations of the supreme practice.
Please remove demons, misguidedness and obstacles.
Please grant the supreme and ordinary siddhis.
Om Maham vajra guru pedma siddhi hum
We'll continue on page 24. Let's make the mandala offering to the three jewels
and requesting the teaching to unfold in our minds and hearts clearly and for the benefit of all.
Sajipu cukshim metokram rira bling ji nide jen padi
Sanjay jing tu mikte pul wahi roku nam da jin la cupar show
Vidam guru ratna mandala kam nayata yami
Sim jin nam ji sim padaan rohi che trag jitawar
Che chung tu mukte pa ye jochi kolokodu so
The earth anointed with perfumed water and strewn with flowers
Mammeru and the four continents ornamented with sun and moon
By offering them visualized as a buddha field
May all sentient beings enjoy the pure land
Vidam guru ratna mandala kam nayata yami
According to the wishes of sentient beings
and their capacities for the high and low, common and uncommon vehicles
please turn the wheel of dharma
So again, thank you and welcome whether we're here in the room
and then also all sharing the same time and place in this precious world
at this time in the mandala of our beautiful teachers
and we're here at Padmasami Lane
and I think maybe most of you were here last week
but in case anyone's new, thank you, welcome
Kim Po Sei Wong Rinpoche very kindly asks that we share our Saturday afternoon nundros
with the sanghas at large for anyone interested
especially those practicing the nundra
to have a little sangha time together, to practice together
and then also to just reflect a little bit upon these teachings
and practice of the nundra
which we all know encompasses all of the Buddhist teachings
all of the practices
and so what we're thinking to do with these days, with our time
is to reflect a little bit on the nundra
and then mostly do the practice together
and so whether you're new to Buddhism in general
whether we've been practicing for years
the nundra is just so beautiful way to engage
I think anything we could reflect a little bit upon with nundra
of course it's beautiful to take it into our practice of nundra proper
but because it embodies all of the Buddhist teachings it's all good
and all going to be of benefit if it is
and I just thought to say from the beginning a few people wrote
and just asked questions about receiving transmission
for these teachings and for the practice in particular
and so that is something very traditional
it's always very good to have the blessings of the lineage
as we're engaging with our practice
and so traditionally it is good to receive empowerment
and blessings to receive what's called the lung or the transmission
where someone who's been practicing
and especially has some realization of the teachings
reads them and we receive the blessings to take them into our own mind and heart
and then of course receiving the teachings is important
but most important is that we practice
Kim Po Se Wong Rinpoche has said very clearly that
anyone who wants to join the practice is welcome
and has his blessings and his encouragement to practice
there's these few little minutes and moments we'll have to talk a little bit
and reflect on the teachings
there's many teachings on YouTube
there's our PBC YouTube channel
there's so many books by our venerable teachers as well as others on the nundra
so you're welcome to do that
and then of course we're in kind of strange times with the COVID pandemic
but when the time comes definitely people who really want to follow through
with making this part of their daily practice can and should
we'll see what we can do to come and receive a transmission in person
with Kim Po Se Wong Rinpoche or if you know someone else carrying the lineage
so I just wanted to say that to start so please feel free to join
and last week we went over very briefly what nundra is
and kind of went through what it is, what the sections of the practice are
and so we were thinking to just continue with that pattern
as we're cycling through week to week with this
and so last week was maybe almost a blur as to what we did and went over
but we'll just start in the beginning and we'll move our way through
so we thought today would be kind of again setting up the circumstances
for our practice looking at what are called the three frames
or the three noble ones and then also with our nundra in particular
to some degree start to look at the sections of nundra
like we mentioned there's many nundra practices
and nundra means foundation, what goes before or what's the essence
the source, the heart of any and all truly beneficial practice
nundra has all those elements and so we'll go over those sections
basically there's two nundras, there's outer nundra or kind of common nundra
common foundational things to take into our mind and heart
and then the uncommon extraordinary nundra of the practices in particular
and so we'll go over those as the weeks go
a few people had asked about especially the mandala section
so we will go over that, I'll send out an email
which kind of will have a little bit of a schedule as to when we can focus more on certain topics
but first we have the outer nundra, four thoughts that turn the mind
and then once we enter the extraordinary nundra
we have taking refuge, bodhicitta, mandala offering, vajrasattva practice, purification, guru yoga
and then in addition to that we have this aspiration to Amitabha to accomplish PoA
as well as the charity of giving everything with our great bodhicitta
and so we'll send out a little bit of a schedule as to looking at the Saturdays we'll be doing that
so people can kind of have some sense of how we're progressing
so with the practice, practice or meditation means we're becoming familiar
familiarizing with things as they are
the Great Kindness Buddha Shakyamuni gave the profound vast ocean of teachings
that so beautifully through the blessings of the lineage of this lineage of practice and study
which came to Tibet in the 8th century entails the full package of the Buddhist teachings
which can be summarized into three vehicles or three yanas that are practiced as a unity
the whole aim of the Buddhist teachings are to remove our obscurations and the causes of them
and by that naturally bringing out our innate goodness qualities
our innate Buddhahood central to the teachings is that the Buddha taught
every single living being has a Buddha nature
has that potential for inconceivable, uncompounded, immeasurable love, wisdom, compassion
qualities we all have but just need to bring out
and so by seeing, refraining from harm, engaging in benefit
working with our own mind is our path and our practice
and like we'll get to a little bit later on
all the results of our experience have their causes
so in the really big big big picture the cause of our Buddhahood is our Buddha nature
so that's something definitely to take in our mind and our heart
and that's what we're doing with the teachings
and so we have, we're developing our wisdom
we have what are called the three wisdoms
which are listening, hearing, reading, the teachings
and then contemplating, thinking, reflecting, taking them to heart with practice
so study, contemplation, practice
and similarly when we begin any practice or maybe take a step back
we have our practice time to kind of bring in that third wisdom
with these sessions we're kind of moving a little bit
with all of those developing those three wisdoms
but what little bit I bring up here now obviously isn't the whole vast ocean of the Dharma
but little sparks and this is really like Rinpoche mentions and it's true
we've all heard so many teachings, we've all done some degree of practice
just bringing them up into our own minds and hearts
and settling into the practice, working with our own mind
is what we're really trying to do
and so when we have a formal practice that we're taking
there's what are called three frames or three noble ones
which is essentially saying we want to kind of have the right frame
the right vessel for our practice to touch home base
and then everything in the world has a beginning, has a middle and has an end
and so kind of using that natural truth
we're working with that with how we structure our practice
and everything that's said in the teachings, everything that happens is circumstantial
our motivation is what makes all the difference
and so like Rinpoche says at the beginning of every teaching
like all the great masters say at the beginning of every teaching
but this is something we should always be doing with every time we sit down to practice
is engaging with what's called the three motivations
motivation, intention really makes all the difference
and so that's the big part of this first frame
and again they're not like a step we're going to take and leave it behind
we're setting the foundations and we're growing from there
so when we have made a little bit of time for practice
we want to sit down, we want to reconnect with those
and so basically like we've heard many times but again we need to do it
it's connecting with our joy, our appreciation
relax, you know, let go and recognize just how precious our situation is
quietly, calmly, it doesn't have to be like some panic
excitement but just take a moment to refresh and reflect on how precious our situation is
and then engaging our bodhicitta
really thinking through the power of interdependence
through the power of the truth of the innate goodness
that really make that aspiration, may this practice, may this study, may this contemplation
truly be of benefit not just for myself but countless sentient beings in this life, beyond this
life
beyond my perception just truly generating with that vast, as vast a space there are beings
as much as there are obscurations, there are sentient beings
every sentient being has the same beautiful nature
sorry I'm getting my tech feedback here, I'll try to adjust this so I'm not wrestling at you all
refreshing with our bodhicitta
relaxing, contentment, joy, appreciation
and then expanding our bodhicitta, the vast, limitless sentient beings
and then connecting with our devotion, with our pure perception
which can be seen kind of recognizing there's nothing else but this moment
deep down this moment is pure, this moment is perfect
this isn't some coincidental accident
we are here with our practice in the spirit of love and compassion
these amazing teachings have come into our life with living human teachers who embody them so
beautifully
that we have the fortune to meet and to practice together as sangha
even like over space and time
so precious, so beautiful
so like those five, connecting with that, just the perfection of this moment, this is the perfect
time
this is the perfect place
we have the perfect teacher, we have the perfect teaching
and we're all the perfect, just everything has come into place with the assembly of people in the
mandala receiving these teachings
on the deep level too, this vastness view that deep down everything is pure enlightened mind
everything we experience is within our mind, of our mind
our mind is pure, our mind is vast, it's Buddha mind
all sounds, all thoughts are the speech of the Buddha nature
all forms, all appearances are the display of the Buddha's bodies
just connecting with that view at least
because our view is so important without having a little bit of a vista
then we're kind of left a little bit in the dark
so bringing out that inner light, that inner wisdom, feeling that pure view
the three vadra states, enlightened mind, enlightened body, enlightened speech is our whole
experience
this is the perfect time, this is the perfect place
its nature is bodhicitta, bringing out bodhicitta
thinking of everyone who has not recognized that beautiful nature, including ourselves
and then looking at the suffering we have, the suffering others have
with an open mind, an open heart, and relaxing with that
that's the essence of these three motivations, sometimes that's called the motivation of ren
unciation
often Rinpoche says kind of joy and appreciation, which is true
but also it's that aspect of looking at things enough clearly at how things actually are
that we're not so much going against the grain so we'll talk a little bit about that when we get to
the four thoughts
but more contentment, more joy, more appreciation for our situation
less obsession with our story, kind of getting out of the way of ourselves and others
that's the essence of renunciation maybe bodhicitta, pure perception, devotion
these are the three motivations, and again and again the great teachers say
our teacher says we're starting with these things at the beginning because that is the nature
the whole vast ocean of the Buddhist teachings which we have the great fortune to have in our hand
and we're trying to take into our heart, it's called like I mentioned earlier
the three vehicles, the foundational vehicle or Theravadin Buddhism or sometimes called Hinayana
in relation to the Mahayana and the extension of Mahayana is Vajrayana
the view and the motivation of all of our practice is practicing these three vehicles together
all the teachings, all the practices, the view that is established
the meditation we do that helps to embody and familiarize ourselves and become more natural
authentic with that view is called meditation which is helped by our conduct
both on the cushion and off the cushion and that brings us to the result of moving through the
paths
and the bhoomis to full Buddhahood for the benefit of all
and so the essence of basic foundation of Buddhism is renunciation
learning to be less selfish, less obsession, more contentment, more appreciation, more joy
you know not getting so fixed on our snags and lost in our crags
but kind of really taking in more of the full vista where we can see maybe in the big picture
we're really quite fortunate anyway I should watch the time here too
but the essence of foundational Buddhism is renunciation, joy, appreciation, contentment, less
obsession, more contentment
the essence of Mahayana is bodhicitta which is that subject
but that's the essence and again even more openness
the essence of Vajrayana is pure perception
kind of devotional awe and reference for the innate goodness and natural purity of all phenomena
and so with that we purify our obscurations
we go right to the heart of our practice so that's why in the beginning of our practice
we're beginning with those three simple things connecting with our joy, appreciation, bodhicitta,
devotion, pure perception
and we enter into the practice with that
so when we do start our practice
again forgive me I'm really kind of trying to navigate our time so we actually do end up doing some
practice
so I'll try to keep it a little bit short
but just to again take back if we're thinking about our formal practice
reserving a little bit of time to do that is good
ideally that's going to be something we could do day to day
or however fits with our rhythms and the other obligations and things we need to do in our life
but really reserving some time for practice is so special
and it doesn't have to be hours
but what makes all the difference over time is a continuum
so when we start our practice whatever the amount of time
kind of just like we've done so far arriving, paying attention to our, excuse me, our posture
I don't think we have time to go over everything so maybe next week in the beginning we can go over
a little bit of like
just basic things with our posture, our body, the seven kind of aligning
there's also many teachings on that
we did the breath purification, relaxing our mind
and just like I've just said engaging with our joy, appreciation, bodhicitta, devotion
opening our mind and our heart and extending that
and then feeling the presence of the living lineage
the blessings of all the Buddhas, the presence of our teacher
and then we begin the practice
and so usually we always begin with the seven line prayer, lineage prayers
and then of course we're particularly working on the nundra sadhana itself
and this is particularly the dudrum tursar nundra
that was revealed and kind of distilled by His Holiness Duddham Rinpoche
from his previous reincarnations work
the very concise, very beautiful, it's what most everyone in the mandala Padmasambhava Buddhist
Center
practices as their daily practice and moves through the nundra in their life
so that's what we're following
and as we're doing the practice
I'm kind of going through things once we actually get to the practice according to our time
so just know that your practice doesn't have to be the same as what we're doing here every day
as far as the amount of time we spend on things
or how many times you recite a certain line or whether we say in Tibetan or English or both
that's kind of a little open so just know that
so when you do have time starting like I said
and then like I mentioned we have since we're on this line of the motivation
and kind of setting the stage this first frame of the good and the beginning
just like that's the essence of the Buddhist teachings
everything is good in the beginning so starting right with those qualities
as we can connect with them right here and now is what we're doing
and then with the nundra itself
we have I think it's on page 26, 27 is where the actual nundra practices begin in this
and there's these this is called the four reflections that reverse the mind
so this is again in that good and the beginning aspect
not that we leave it behind but turning our mind towards these things is so effective
it said if we can really reflect on these things before every practice
before every teaching throughout the day it really helps and why is that?
because most of the time we're expecting something different
we all have the Buddha nature
but we haven't realized it or we're in the process of recognizing it
that's the only difference between fully enlightened Buddha
an ordinary sentient being like myself
is how much we recognize our nature or not
that's what Buddha means fully developed, fully awakened
and completely purified of obscurations and their causes
we tend to think things are permanent
they're going to be last forever
that I am and that is and nothing matters
except for what I want or think I want right now
who I think I am or who I think that person is etc. and so on
we think things are not so much connected that maybe things don't have so much of effect on each
other
things are permanent or individual, independent, going to last forever
lots of things that we all have this basic ignorance of how things truly are
and these four thoughts are things that everyone whether you're Buddhist or not
these are facts of life
and so kind of reflecting on these we have these really simple lines
but really spending time reflecting on these like throughout the day
or like reading about them in words of my perfect teacher
or from Dojo Rinpoche or Kenpo Sei Wong and Kenchen Paulden Rinpoche
these are totally traditional teachings
that means they're tried and true have been effective for everyone for these great masters
these are things they've taken to their mind in their heart
so these four thoughts are as we know basically reflecting on this precious human birth
reflecting on impermanence
reflecting on the law of karma
and reflecting on suffering on samsara
just really looking at it all those things kind of with an open mind with an open heart kind of
clearly
and so again we really should start our practice soon but as we can we can say more
and so much already has been said by our wonderful teacher as well as so many other great masters
so I really encourage you look try to find even if you've read reflect on these things
really having them in our in our day in the atmosphere of our attitude and mind
really recognizing and reflecting on all the situations we're free of
both within this human world that we can perceive
and then through the omniscience of the Buddha and the truth of his teachings
the experiences of other beings and other realms
there's so many situations we're totally free of
and we have so many good circumstances in our favor
especially regarding being relieved and released from suffering and its causes
a Buddha has appeared and the teaching and has taught and the teachings remain
and we have to some degree some interest in faith in those teachings
and our putting them into practice is up to us
so like reflecting on on all that and how rare actually in the big picture
being human born human with all these favorable freedoms and endowments and circumstances is
amazing
and impermanence no matter which way we turn we can see how everything's changing
always our emotions our minds our perceptions the day our lives civilizations everything
that comes into being moves out of being everything's changing
look to our own lives you know
no matter which way we look like the Buddha said of all the footprints of all the animals
the elephants is supreme of all the things we could contemplate impermanence is supreme
is it something we all can really very clearly see and just be familiar with that truth
and it's not all a bummer either of course right no matter if things couldn't change
we couldn't become more natural
and really logically speaking if nothing ever changed
it's kind of impossible anyway impermanence and like Nipam Rinpoche said
becoming familiar with impermanence is so really really really special
and profound to our mind and our consciousness because one seeing things how they are
but it's also how we begin to understand emptiness
and then reflecting on karma like it says the results of virtuous or unvirtuous actions are inex
orable
that's another just fact of life everything we experience is the ripening of our past thoughts and
actions
that's what karma means is action often sometimes I think especially in the West
people think karma means just what's happening but it's also what we do with what's happening
and that's what makes all the difference for the future so they say just like in the common
if we plant an apple seed and give it all the right conditions to grow
it's going to root and shoot and flower and fruit and there'll be more and more apples
if some if it gets dry and dries out it won't happen
there's so many circumstances that can happen that won't bring it to being
but when the conditions to bring that seed into fruition happen it will happen
and it will be not just one seed many seeds and many apples similar with all our experiences
what we how we perceive what we do with our body with our speech especially with our mind
and the actions that flow through our speech and our body that makes all the difference
and the results are inevitable what we do with them is what makes all the difference
and here we have practice and suffering the three realms of cyclic existence
have the nature of an ocean of suffering we have these three basic poisons
as the Buddha called our ignorance our aversion our attachment and from all from those
all samsara springs so suffering has its causes and there's so many sufferings beings go through
both that we can perceive in this world to whatever degree we can and again according to the
the omniscient true speech of the Buddha who kind of told us of other experiences
beings go through that are outside of our perception but are just as real to them as this is real
to us
so again we don't have a whole lot of time maybe we can definitely look at these again
talk a little bit about these but taking these to heart becoming more familiar with
like they say with suffering samsara is suffering samsara is ignorance of what of how things are
and all the actions done out of that basic ignorance and hope and fear that engenders our bodhic
itta
and it's also maybe we begin to slowly but surely recognize we're not going to find
everlasting peace and relief in samsara as much as we have ignorance that much we have samsara
as much as we have aversion and attachment and ego clinging and grasping that much we have samsara
whose nature is empty is open is aware and that's why we begin this namo the very first line
lama infallible constant protector beware of me calling to the mind the lama the Buddha
one who has completely realized that nature is free of obscuration due to their great kindness
and compassionate activity as bringing this to our own experience that we can explore our own
nature
bring out those innate qualities of our own mind cleanse our Buddha nature to bring it
give it all the causes and conditions to expand to grow into full bloom state remove our obsc
urations
and kenpo samangs also said this first line namo lama infallible constant protector be aware of me
that's also of course thinking of the outer lama and the great living lineage that's present
whose blessings and activities and realization is in our life in our mind but also our own
awareness
our own view our own attitude with kind of keeping that in our mind and heart as we reflect on
these four thoughts which naturally bring out our bodhicitta make us more content bring out more
bodhicitta kind of give that at least kind of courage that commitment that devotion and closeness
feeling to just the innate gorgeous beauty of truth and what's natural and authentic so
which is the three jewels the Buddha Dharma Sangha so maybe with that I'll conclude my little
talking
and we can actually do some practice so yeah I have time so we'll just sit for a moment
try to remember everything I just babbered about and and everything you know and have in your heart
and the real dharmas that awaken those beautiful qualities in your practice
so
we'll begin with this seven line prayer and quick lineage prayers we'll just say seven line prayer
once and then our lineage prayers ordinarily we do three times so just for time maybe we'll do one
time we'll do three times in our mind and our own language so we'll just sit for a moment and then
our own
love to shake so good a bed my CD home Samantha Badra Vadrasatva promitavadra Sri Singha Padma
Kara the 25 king and subjects so Zor no knock the hundred Turtons and others lamas of comma
and terminages to you I pray in the past you were the Vidyadhara Nudin Dorje Tsal in the future you
will be the Buddha Mopataye now you are the regent of Padma Sambhava the actual presence
of Drogban Lotzawa Jigjal Yashidorje to you I pray happy with little content and rich and jewels
of the three trainings with loving compassion seeing all beings as parents through threefold
realization you made three doors three vatras virtuous monk Pima Tsutram to you I pray the
supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padma Sambhava which is the essential extraordinary view
and doctrine of the early translation school you keep alive and spread by the light of wisdom
Lord of Dharma great Kimpo I pray at your lotus feet in the palace of the ogman Dharmadhatu
the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times the one who shows clearly the Dharmakaya
of my own mind we pray to the honorable root guru glorious root teacher precious one dwelling
on the lotus seat on the crown of my head hold me with your great kindness bestow the
accomplishments of body speech and mind that which is really expand our view increase our
devotion and kind of that purity view we'll recite this calling the lama from afar we
have time today and again as we read these reflecting on the meaning but relaxing with
that view bringing out everything we've been talking about letting all the teachings and
practice we have have a landing pad and a doorway through these words so we're on page 18 in
chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of
chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of
chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of chapter 8 of